Js update (#7)
learn-co-curriculum/phase-1-using-fetch: README.md

- Working around backwards compatibility issues
- Identify examples of the AJAX technique on popular websites

## Setup

This is a code along reading. Please fork and clone this reading down to your
local computer before starting.

## Introduction

When it comes to making engaging web sites, we often find ourselves needing to
send a lot of data (text, images, media, etc.) so that the page is exciting.

**But** browsers won't show anything until they've processed all of that data.
As a result, they show nothing. The screen stays blank and users experience
"waiting."

Too much waiting means visitors will click away and never come back. Web users
expect sites to load quickly **and** to stay updated. Research shows that 40
percent of visitors to a website will leave if the site takes more than 3
seconds to load. Mobile users are even _less_ patient.

> To solve this problem and help provide lots of other really great features, we

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We can solve this problem and gain access to lots of other really great features
```

> developed a technique called **_AJAX_**. As mentioned at the beginning of this

Reviewer: ```suggestion
by using a technique called **_AJAX_**. As mentioned at the beginning of this
```

statements come in.

### Promises

We're going to talk about this in more detail in a later section, but in order
to understand how `fetch` and `.then` statements work together, we need to talk
a little bit about _Promises_.

A _Promise_ is a piece of data that JavaScript generates when it kicks off an
asynchronous task. It's used to determine whether that asynchronous operation is
still running, if it has completed, or if it failed.

Try updating the code in your `index.js` file to the following code snippet.

```JavaScript
const myPromise = fetch("https://anapioficeandfire.com/api/books")

console.log(myPromise)
```

If you have `index.html` open in your browser and you open up your browser
console, you should see the following: `Promise {<pending>}`.

Because our `fetch` request takes a while to complete, and because we want to
move on to other tasks, it generates this `Promise` object for us, which we can
use to determine when the fetch request finishes.

When Promises are first generated, they have a status of _pending_. That status
can either resolve to _fulfilled_, if the operation is successful, or
_rejected_, if the operation fails.

> Once our fetch is complete, the status of this Promise object will change to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once our fetch is complete, assuming it's successful, the status of this Promise object will change to
```

> _fufilled_.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
_fulfilled_.
```

Let's make the following modification to our code:

```JavaScript
const myPromise = fetch("https://anapioficeandfire.com/api/books")

console.log(myPromise)

setTimeout(() =>{
    console.log(myPromise)
}, 1000)
```

We should now see a new, additional log in our browser console: `Promise
{<fulfilled>: Response}`. (If you don't see it, try increasing the time interval
in setTimeout.)

### Waiting for a Fulfilled Promise

Our `.then` statements are designed to wait for the Promise generated by `fetch`
to be fulfilled. In other words, it waits until we've received the response back
from our server.

In order to give each `.then` statement some code to run once the Promise has
been fulfilled, we need to pass each `.then` statement a _callback function_.

In the case of our `.fetch`, this callback function will run once our server has
sent back the response. It will also be _passed_ the response from the server as
an argument:

```JavaScript
fetch("https://anapioficeandfire.com/api/books")
.then(response => {
  console.log(response)

> })

Reviewer: ```suggestion
});
```

```

If you add this code to your `index.js` file, you should see a new `Response`
object logged to your browser console (you can comment out the previous code to
if you'd like).

If you expand this Response object in the browser console, you should see that
it contains several key/value pairs in it, including `type`, `body`, `status`,
and `url`, among others.

Great! We've successfully made a request to our API and received a response back
from our server! Now it's time to extract the data we want from our response.

### Parsing JSON

When working with the response, we want to extract the data contained within the

> response's `body`. The `body` contains all the data we want from our server in

Reviewer: ```suggestion
response's `body`. The `body` contains all the data we want from the server in
```

the form of JSON.

We want to convert that data from JSON into actual JavaScript data structures -
arrays, objects, and so on.

If you remember from previous lessons, JSON is technically just a string.
Strings are great for sending data between clients and servers, but they are
hard to work with when we want to interact with data in our JavaScript code.

Fortunately, we can use the built-in `.json` method to convert JSON into the
data structures we want! The `.json` method _parses_ JSON, which means it goes
through the JSON string and converts the symbols in JSON into actual JavaScript
data structures.

Let's include the `.json` method in our code!

```JavaScript
fetch("https://anapioficeandfire.com/api/books")
.then(response => {

>     return response.json()

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    return response.json();
```

  })
```

## Our Second .then

Just as our completed `.fetch` request will pass the response from our server to
our first `.then` statement, our first `.then` statement will pass our parsed
data to our second `.then` statement.

Keep in mind that we _do_ need to **_return_** our parsed data from the first
`.then` statement in order for our second `.then` statement to receive it.

```JavaScript
fetch("https://anapioficeandfire.com/api/books")
.then((response) => {
  return response.json()
})
.then((data) =>{
  console.log(data)
})
```

If you update the code in your `index.js` file, you should see the data we
requested from our API being logged to our browser console!

We now have access to the data we want to use from within this second `.then`
statement. We can pass it on to other functions that can then render that
information to our webpage, or complete some other operation using our data:

```JavaScript
const renderData = (data) =>{
  // perform DOM manipulation to display our fetched data
}

fetch("https://anapioficeandfire.com/api/books")
.then(response => {
  return response.json()
})
.then(data =>{
  renderData(data)

> })

Reviewer: ```suggestion
});
```

```

## Our .catch Statement

Unfortunately, things don't always work out the way we want them to when we
write programs. (You might have experienced this phenomenon.)

What if, for example, our server responds with an _error_ rather than with the
data we wanted? If our code doesn't have any way to handle that error, it will
break!

> This is where the `.catch` portion of a `fetch` statement comes in to play. If

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is where the `.catch` portion of a `fetch` statement comes into play. If
```

our server request results in an error, our `fetch` will bypass our `.then`
statements and pass the error to the `.catch` statement.

At that point, we can run some error handling logic, like updating the display
to let a user know that an error occurred. Or, while we're developing our site,
we could just print the error to the console to check out what went wrong:

```JavaScript
.catch((error) =>{

>   console.error(error)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  console.error(error);
```

> })

Reviewer: ```suggestion
});
```

```

## All Together Again

All together, this is what a complete `fetch` request will look like!

```JavaScript

> const renderData = (data) =>{

Reviewer: ```suggestion
const renderData = (data) => {
```

  // perform DOM manipulation to display our fetched data
  // Feel free to write more code here!
}

fetch("https://anapioficeandfire.com/api/books")
  .then(response => response.json())
  .then(renderData)

>   .catch(console.error)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  .catch(console.error);
```

```

> (Hey! The syntax in this example is different than the others! But it still

Reviewer: You may need to include an explanation here - I'm not sure we've shown them an example where they don't have to explicitly pass the argument. Even if we have, though, a review would probably be a good idea

Author: Good idea. I'll add a little note to this portion.

`GET` request to our backend server.

As discussed in previous lessons, an HTTP `GET` request is just a simple request
for data from our Frontend to our Backend .

It doesn't require us to send any data from our Frontend to our Backend, nor do
we need to include any specification of the type of HTTP request we're making -
`fetch` makes a `GET` request by default when we pass it a URL as it's only
argument!

We'll learn about sending other types of HTTP requests using `fetch` in upcoming
lessons.

## Working Around Backwards Compatibility Issues

As you can see, `fetch()` provides us with a quick and easy way to request data
from our server within our client-side code.

In older code you might see `jquery.ajax` or `$.ajax` or an object called an
`XMLHttpRequestObject`. You might also see libraries like `axios` used in newer
code.

These are all different tools that accomplish similar tasks as `fetch`. We'll be
using `fetch` throughout the duration of the program, but you can and should
research these older tools if you're interested!

## Identify Examples of the AJAX Technique on Popular Websites

The AJAX technique opens up a lot of uses!

> - It allows us to pull in dynamic content. The browser can render the same HTML

Reviewer: Recommend replacing this bullet point with:
- It allows us to quickly update dynamic components within a larger web page. The dynamic content can be pulled into the rendered HTML _without_ reloading the entire page. This approach was pioneered by Gmail. Thanks to AJAX, the email list in Gmail is swapped for the contents of an individual email swiftly, while all the surrounding elements (navigation, search bar, etc.) remain in place.

Author: I like that, thanks!

- Working around backwards compatibility issues
- Identify examples of the AJAX technique on popular websites

## Setup

> This is a code along reading. Please fork and clone this reading down to your

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is a code-along reading. Please fork and clone this reading down to your
```

local computer before starting.

## Introduction

When it comes to making engaging web sites, we often find ourselves needing to
send a lot of data (text, images, media, etc.) so that the page is exciting.

**But** browsers won't show anything until they've processed all of that data.
As a result, they show nothing. The screen stays blank and users experience
"waiting."

Too much waiting means visitors will click away and never come back. Web users
expect sites to load quickly **and** to stay updated. Research shows that 40
percent of visitors to a website will leave if the site takes more than 3
seconds to load. Mobile users are even _less_ patient.

To solve this problem and help provide lots of other really great features, we
developed a technique called **_AJAX_**. As mentioned at the beginning of this
module, AJAX is short for _Asynchronous JavaScript and XML_ (although we'll be
using JSON instead of XML).

In AJAX we:

1. Deliver an initial, engaging page using HTML and CSS which browsers render
   _quickly_
2. _Then_ we use JavaScript to add more to the DOM, behind the scenes

> Current implementations of AJAX rely the following  technologies:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Current implementations of AJAX rely on the following technologies:
```

  });
```

When we write fetch requests in our JavaScript code, this is the form it will

> often take - one call to our `fetch` method, followed by two `.then` statements.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
often take — one call to our `fetch` method, followed by two `.then` statements.
```

Let's walk through each of these pieces of code step by step!

## Fetch Itself

Let's start off with the `fetch` function itself. What's it doing? How are we
using it?

> As we discussed in previous sections, clients request data from servers and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As we discussed in previous lessons, clients request data from servers and
```

servers send data to clients. This is the _request-response cycle_.

`fetch` is used to initiate that request-response cycle from our client-side
code to our servers. When we enter a Google search, for example, Google's
client-side code initiates a `fetch` request (or something similar) for the data
we're searching for.

We use `fetch` by passing it a URL that points toward the server we want to

> communicate with. We'll be mainly passing URLs pointing toward `localhost`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
communicate with. In this phase of the program, we'll be mainly passing URLs pointing toward `localhost`
```

servers run by JSON Server, but we can pass it a URL pointing toward any API we

> want to work with - this [Game of Thrones](https://anapioficeandfire.com/) API,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
want to work with — this [Game of Thrones](https://anapioficeandfire.com/) API,
```

> for example! When developing the Frontend for a Full Stack application, you'll

Reviewer: ```suggestion
for example! When developing the front end for a Full Stack application, you'll
```

> pass `fetch` the URL to your backend API.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
pass `fetch` the URL to a back end API **you** create.
```

> We'll be using this API to play around with `fetch` during the rest of this

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We'll be using the Game of Thrones API to play around with `fetch` during the rest of this
```

> lesson. Add the following code snippet to your `index.js` file! Go ahead and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
lesson. Add the code snippet below to your `index.js` file, then go ahead and
```

> open your `index.html` file in your browser as well - we won't see any output in

Reviewer: ```suggestion
open your `index.html` file in your browser. We won't see any output in
```

our browser console yet, but we will be using it in later examples.

```JavaScript

> fetch("https://anapioficeandfire.com/api/books")

Reviewer: ```suggestion
fetch("https://anapioficeandfire.com/api/books");
```

```

Congratulations! You've officially run your first fetch request!

### Fetch is Asynchronous

We discussed JavaScript's asynchronous abilities in some of our previous
lessons. As a brief refresher, _asynchronous_ code is code that allows us to
start an operation in our code, then switch to running other pieces of code
while we wait for that operation to finish.

`fetch` is a prime example of asynchronous code in JavaScript! It also
demonstrates how useful asynchronous programming is.

> Think about making a web request - your computer is asking some remote server

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Think about making a web request — your computer is asking some remote server
```

for some information. You might be thousands of miles away from the server!

That server may then have to interact with a database to get the information
you've requested. Once the database has finished looking for the appropriate
data and giving it to the server, the server then has to send that data all the
way back to you.

That's a lot to do, and it takes a long time!

If our code had to wait for the server to respond with the data we're asking for
before moving on to other tasks, it could really slow down the performance of
our website. Code that halts other code from running is often called _blocking_

> code - it blocks our code's ability to move on to other tasks.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
code — it blocks our code's ability to move on to other tasks.
```

Fortunately, because fetch uses asynchronous JavaScript, it is considered

> _non-blocking_ - our code is free to move on to other tasks before our server

Reviewer: ```suggestion
_non-blocking_ — our code is free to move on to other tasks before our server
```

gives us a response!

For example, in the following code snippet, our `console.log` will run before we
receive a response back from the server (we'll see this in greater detail a
little further down).

```JavaScript

> fetch("https://anapioficeandfire.com/api/books")

Reviewer: ```suggestion
fetch("https://anapioficeandfire.com/api/books");
```

> console.log("I don't wait!") // runs before the server has returned a response.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
console.log("I don't wait!"); // runs before the server has returned a response.
```

```

## Our First .then

Ok, so we can keep doing stuff while waiting for our server to respond - neat.

But what about code that we want to run _after_ our server responds? What about
code that's supposed to actually _use_ that data? That's where our `.then`
statements come in.

### Promises

We're going to talk about this in more detail in a later section, but in order
to understand how `fetch` and `.then` statements work together, we need to talk
a little bit about _Promises_.

A _Promise_ is a piece of data that JavaScript generates when it kicks off an
asynchronous task. It's used to determine whether that asynchronous operation is
still running, if it has completed, or if it failed.

Try updating the code in your `index.js` file to the following code snippet.
Then open your `index.html` file in your browser:

```JavaScript

> const myPromise = fetch("https://anapioficeandfire.com/api/books")

Reviewer: ```suggestion
const myPromise = fetch("https://anapioficeandfire.com/api/books");
```

> console.log(myPromise)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
console.log(myPromise);
```

```

If you open up your browser console, you should see the following:
`Promise {<pending>}`.

Because our `fetch` request takes a while to complete, and because we want to
move on to other tasks, it generates this `Promise` object for us, which we can
use to determine when the fetch request finishes.

When Promises are first generated, they have a status of _pending_. That status
can either resolve to _fulfilled_, if the operation is successful, or
_rejected_, if the operation fails.

Once our fetch is complete, the status of this Promise object will change to
_fufilled_.

Let's make the following modification to our code:

```JavaScript

> const myPromise = fetch("https://anapioficeandfire.com/api/books")

Reviewer: ```suggestion
const myPromise = fetch("https://anapioficeandfire.com/api/books");
```

> console.log(myPromise)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
console.log(myPromise);
```

setTimeout(() =>{

>     console.log(myPromise)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    console.log(myPromise);
```

> }, 1000)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
}, 1000);
```

```

We should now see a new, additional log in our browser console: `Promise
{<fulfilled>: Response}`. (If you don't see it, try increasing the time interval
in setTimeout.)

### Waiting for a Fulfilled Promise

Our `.then` statements are designed to wait for the Promise generated by `fetch`
to be fulfilled. In other words, it waits until we've received the response back
from our server.

In order to give each `.then` statement some code to run once the Promise has
been fulfilled, we need to pass each `.then` statement a _callback function_.

In the case of our `.fetch`, this callback function will run once our server has
sent back the response. It will also be _passed_ the response from the server as
an argument:

```JavaScript
fetch("https://anapioficeandfire.com/api/books")
.then(response => {

>   console.log(response)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  console.log(response);
```

})
```

If you add this code to your `index.js` file, you should see a new `Response`

> object logged to your browser console (you can comment out the previous code to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
object logged to your browser console (you can comment out the previous code
```

if you'd like).

If you expand this Response object in the browser console, you should see that
it contains several key/value pairs in it, including `type`, `body`, `status`,
and `url`, among others.

Great! We've successfully made a request to our API and received a response back
from our server! Now it's time to extract the data we want from our response.

### Parsing JSON

When working with the response, we want to extract the data contained within the
response's `body`. The `body` contains all the data we want from our server in
the form of JSON.

> We want to convert that data from JSON into actual JavaScript data structures -

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We want to convert that data from JSON into actual JavaScript data structures —
```

arrays, objects, and so on.

If you remember from previous lessons, JSON is technically just a string.
Strings are great for sending data between clients and servers, but they are
hard to work with when we want to interact with data in our JavaScript code.

Fortunately, we can use the built-in `.json` method to convert JSON into the
data structures we want! The `.json` method _parses_ JSON, which means it goes
through the JSON string and converts the symbols in JSON into actual JavaScript
data structures.

Let's include the `.json` method in our code!

```JavaScript
fetch("https://anapioficeandfire.com/api/books")
.then(response => {
    return response.json()

>   })

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  });
```

```

## Our Second .then

Just as our completed `.fetch` request will pass the response from our server to
our first `.then` statement, our first `.then` statement will pass our parsed
data to our second `.then` statement. Keep in mind that we _do_ need to
**_return_** our parsed data from the first `.then` statement in order for our
second `.then` statement to receive it.

```JavaScript
fetch("https://anapioficeandfire.com/api/books")
.then(response => {

>   return response.json()

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  return response.json();
```

})

> .then(data =>{

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.then(data => {
```

>   console.log(data)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  console.log(data);
```

> })

Reviewer: ```suggestion
});
```

```

If you update the code in your `index.js` file, you should see the data we
requested from our API being logged to our browser console!

We now have access to the data we want to use from within this second `.then`
statement. We can pass it on to other functions that can then render that
information to our webpage, or complete some other operation using our data:

```JavaScript

> const renderData = (data) =>{

Reviewer: ```suggestion
const renderData = (data) => {
```

  // perform DOM manipulation to display our fetched data
  // Feel free to write more code here!
}

fetch("https://anapioficeandfire.com/api/books")
.then(response => {

>   return response.json()

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  return response.json();
```

})

> .then(data =>{

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.then(data => {
```

>   renderData(data)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  renderData(data);
```

})
```

## GET Requests

> The type of `fetch` requests we've covered in this lesson has been running a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `fetch` requests we've covered in this lesson have been running a
```

> `GET` request to our backend server.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`GET` request to our back end server.
```

As discussed in previous lessons, an HTTP `GET` request is just a simple request

> for data from our Frontend to our Backend .

Reviewer: ```suggestion
for data from our front end to our back end.
```

> It doesn't require us to send any data from our Frontend to our Backend, nor do

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It doesn't require us to send any data from our front end to our back end, nor do
```

> we need to include any specification of the type of HTTP request we're making -

Reviewer: ```suggestion
we need to include any specification of the type of HTTP request we're making —
```

> `fetch` makes a `GET` request by default when we pass it a URL as it's only

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`fetch` makes a `GET` request by default when we pass it a URL as its only
```

argument!

We'll learn about sending other types of HTTP requests using `fetch` in upcoming
lessons.

## Working Around Backwards Compatibility Issues

As you can see, `fetch()` provides us with a quick and easy way to request data
from our server within our client-side code.

In older code you might see `jquery.ajax` or `$.ajax` or an object called an
`XMLHttpRequestObject`. You might also see libraries like `axios` used in newer
code.

These are all different tools that accomplish similar tasks as `fetch`. We'll be
using `fetch` throughout the duration of the program, but you can and should

> research these older tools if you're interested!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
research these other tools if you're interested!
```

## Conclusion

Many pages use AJAX to provide users fast and engaging sites. It's not always

> necessary - if you're building a static website, basic HTML could suffice.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
necessary — if you're building a static website, basic HTML could suffice.
```

However, for any site that needs to request data from a server, the AJAX
technique is a great tool to have.

Using `fetch()`, we can include requests for data wherever we need to in our

> code. We can `fetch()` data on the click of a button,the expansion of an

Reviewer: ```suggestion
code. We can `fetch()` data on the click of a button, the expansion of an
```
